# Operators & Flow Control

### **Objective: -**

In this module we'll look at ...

- Mathematical, Comparison, and Logical operators
- Data Coercion
- Flow control statements and loops

<br>
Being able to compare variables using comparison operators allows a developer to evaluate a statement as being true or false. You can then quickly complete a function as long as the statement evaluates to true.
</br>
<br >

---

<br >

## Mathematical Operators and Dynamic Typing

**[Mathematical / Arithmetic Operators](https://developer.mozilla.org/en-US/docs/Learn/JavaScript/First_steps/Math#Arithmetic_operators)** are used with _numbers_ to do basic math.

- Addition ( `+` ) - produces the _sum_ of two numbers
- Subtraction ( `-` ) - produces the _difference_ between two numbers
- Division ( `/` ) - produces the _quotient_ of its numbers
- Muliplication (`*`) - produces the _product_ of its numbers
- Exponent ( `**` ) - produces the first number _to the power_ of the second number
- Modulo ( `%` ) - produces only the _remainder_ left over after division

Here are some examples of these Mathematical Operators:

```Javascript
// What would we expect to print?

console.log(10 + 5); // 15
console.log(12 - 3); // 9
console.log(15 / 2); // 7.5
console.log(4 * 5); // 20
console.log(2 ** 3); // 8
console.log(4 % 2); // 0
console.log(8 % 3); // 2
```

While all of these operators can be used with numbers, it is important to note that **the Addition Operator is the only mathematical operator that can be used with non-numbers**, specifically _strings_. As we have seen, using `+` with strings _concatenates_ the strings into one longer string. Here is a refresher though, just in case:

```Javascript
// What would we expect to print?

console.log("10" + "5");
console.log("Hello" + "world");
console.log("Mind " + "the" + " spaces");

// 105
// Helloworld
// Mind the spaces
```

<br >

### **Data Coercion I: Dynamic Typing**

As we learned, JavaScript is _dynamically typed_: we don't have to explicitly declare what type of data will be stored in a variable, and we can replace data of one type with any other type of data.

This can sometimes lead to some 'weird' or unexpected behaviors due to **data coercion**. JS does its best to _coerce_ data types into whatever it sees fit for a given situation. In the case of the operator `+`, **if there are any _string operands_ it attempts to convert _each_ operand into a string**. JS wants to 'combine' strings before it tries to 'add' numbers.

<br >

---

<br >

### **Activity 1 (Everyone)**

#### Mathematical Operators and Introduction to Data Coercion: [2.3.1-MathOperatorsAndDataCoercionIntro.md](Activities/2.3-Activities/2.3.1-MathOperatorsAndDataCoercionIntro.md)

> **TIP**: For our purposes, it is enough to understand _that_ JS coerces data when attempting to combine different types of data, not _how_ JS coerces data in every possible combination.

<br >

---

<br >

## Comparison Operators

[**Comparison Operators**](https://developer.mozilla.org/en-US/docs/Web/JavaScript/Reference/Operators/Comparison_Operators) compare two primitive values and return a boolean.

### **Relational Operators**

- Greater Than ( `>` )
- Less Than ( `<` )
- Greater Than or Equal To ( `>=` )
- Less Than or Equal To ( `<=` )

Here are some examples of these Relational Operators:

```Javascript
// Would the following return true or false?

14 > 8;
31 < 22;
12 >= 12.5;
5 <= 5;

// true
// false
// false
// true
```

<br >

### **Equality Operators**

**'Strict'** comparisons are only true if the expressions are of the _same type_ and the _contents match_.
Abstract (or 'Fuzzy') comparisons converts the expressions to the same type before comparison.

- 'Strict' Equality ( `===` )
- 'Strict' Inequality ( `!==` )
- 'Fuzzy' Equality ( `==` )
- 'Fuzzy' Inequality ( `!=` )
  > **NOTE**: `NaN` is not equal to anything, including `NaN`.

Here are some examples of these Equality Operators:

```Javascript
// Would the following return true or false?

// Strict
3 === 3; // true
2 === "two"; // false
3 !== "3"; // true
"three" !== "three"; // false

// Fuzzy
2 == 2; // true
3 == "three"; // false
2 != "2"; // false
2 != "two"; // true
```

<br >

---

<br >

## Flow Control: `If...Else` Statements

In any programming language, the code needs to make decisions and carry out actions accordingly depending on different inputs.
Conditional statements allow us to represent such decision making in JavaScript, from the choices that must be made, to the resulting outcome of those choices.

Comparing things allows us to set up some conditions: "If this, then that."

The [**if statement**](https://developer.mozilla.org/en-US/docs/Web/JavaScript/Reference/Statements/if...else) executes a statement _if_ a specified condition is true. _Else_, if the condition is false, another statement can be executed.

```javascript
if (condition) {
  console.log("The condition is true.");
} else {
  console.log("The condition is false.");
}
```

> **NOTE**: Notice the _braces_ ( `{ }` ) in the if statement. In JS, braces almost always establish **scope** - code within braces only runs under certain conditions such as when an if statement is true/false or if a function is invoked.

<br >

---

<br >

### **Activity 2 (Everyone)**

#### If...else statements with Comparison Operators: [2.3.2-ComparisonsAndIfElseStatements.md](Activities/2.3-Activities/2.3.4-ComparisonsAndIfElseStatements.md)

<br >

---

<br >

## Flow Control: `switch` Statements

`if...else` statements do the job of enabling conditional code well, but they are not without their downsides. They are good for situations where you've got a couple of choices, and each one requires a reasonable amount of code to be run.

For cases where you just want to set a variable to a certain choice of value or print out a particular statement depending on a condition, the `if...else` syntax can be a bit cumbersome, especially if you've got a large number of choices.

 The [switch statement](https://developer.mozilla.org/en-US/docs/Learn/JavaScript/Building_blocks/conditionals#switch_statements) takes a single expression/value as an input, then looks through a number of choices until one is found that matches input value, and then executes the corresponding code.

```javascript
  switch (expression) {
  case choice1:
    run this code
    break;

  case choice2:
    run this code instead
    break;

  // include as many cases as you like

  default:
    actually, just run this code
}

```

Here is a code example following the above structure...

```javascript

  const errand = "Going Shopping";

  switch (errand) {
    case "Going to the Dentist": {
      let message = "I hate going to the dentist";
      console.log(message);
      break;
    }
    case "Going Shopping": {
      let message = "I love to shop";
      console.log(message);
      break;
    }
    case "Going to the movies": {
      let message = "I love chick-flicks";
      console.log(message);
      break;
    }
    case "Going to the Bank": {
      let message = "Money makes the world go round!";
      console.log(message);
      break;
    }
    case "Going to the gym": {
      let message = "Healthy bodies host healthy minds!";
      console.log(message);
      break;
    }
    default: {
      console.log("No errand");
      break;
    }
  }

```

>**NOTE:** The following points about using the `switch` case statement:

- One can combine several cases that perform / produce one condition;
- The `default` statement does not need to be the last statement. When it is NOT the last statement, it needs a `break`;
- For complex condition code, it's often necessary to scope the code in a code block.

Let's look at this in more detail in the exercise below.

<br >

---

<br >

### **Activity 3 (Everyone)**

#### Practice with `switch` statements: [2.3.3-SwitchStatements.md](Activities/2.3-Activities/2.3.3-SwitchStatements.md)

<br >

---

<br >

### **Data Coercion II: Truthy/Falsy**

Normally, we use comparison operators inside of an if statement's condition because it evaluates to true or false. However, what if we did not use a comparison operator or a boolean in the if statement's condition? What if it was a _string_, a _number_, `undefined`, or `null`?

With if statements, we can leverage the power of the dynamic typing and data coercion. Non-boolean primitive types are _coerced_ into being true or false. We describe this as values having '_truthiness_' or '_falsiness_' - or we say that a value is _truthy_ or _falsy_.
Almost all values in JS are coerced to **truthy**.
There are only 6 non-boolean primitives that are falsy :- `0`, `""` (any empty string), `false`, `undefined`, `null`, `NaN`

<br >

### **The Ternary / Conditional Operator**

The [ternary or conditional operator](https://developer.mozilla.org/en-US/docs/Web/JavaScript/Reference/Operators/Conditional_Operator) ( `?` ) was introduced in ES6 as a one-line shortcut for simple `if` statements. The conditional operator requires three parts:

- a **condition** to check
- an expression to execute if the condition is **true**
- an expression to execute if the condition is **false**

The condition is separated from the "true" expression with a `?`, while the "true" expression is separated from the "false" expression with a `:` (colon).

```javascript
condition ? ifTrue : ifFalse;
```

We can re-write our example `if` statement above as such:

```javascript
condition
  ? console.log("condition is true")
  : console.log("condition is false");
```

<br >

---

<br >

## Logical Operators

[**Logical Operators**](https://developer.mozilla.org/en-US/docs/Web/JavaScript/Reference/Operators/Logical_Operators) evaluate two boolean values and return a single boolean. Logical operators can be used with comparison operators and/or chained to other logical operators to check complex comparisons.

- And ( `&&` ) - true if _both_ expressions are true
- Or ( `||` ) - true if _either_ expression is true
- Not ( `!` ) - true if the expression can be converted/coerced to _false_

> **TIP**: When chaining logical operators, And operators - `&&` - are evaluated before Or operators - `||`. To control the order of evaluation, use parentheses. i.e. `(true || false) && true`

<br >

---

<br >

### **Activity 4 (Students)**

#### Practice with truthy/falsy and logical operators: [2.3.4-TruthyFalsyAndLogicalOperators.js](Activities/2.3-Activities/2.3.4-TruthyFalsyAndLogicalOperators.md)

<br >

---

<br >

## Flow Control: Loops

Computers, unlike humans, excel at doing repetitive tasks over and over again without making mistakes or experiencing fatigue. A couple of the ways that we can coax our computers into doing this work for us is by writing a JS loop using either `while` or `for`.

### **`While` Loop**

The `while` loop looks a lot like an `if` statement. They both execute their associated code block based on the result of their conditional expression. The difference being, the while loop will repeatedly check its conditional expression and continue to run its code block as long as it evaluates to true.

#### Using a `while` loop to print the numbers from 1 - 10

```javascript
// create a variable outside of the while loop
// inside the while loop, we keep track of it and re-assign it until the condition becomes false
let x = 1;

// while x is less than or equal to 10,
while (x <= 10) {
  // print x
  console.log(x);

  // increment by one and re-assign x
  // if we forgot this step, x <= 10 always evaluates to true and we create an infinite loop
  x++;
}
```

<br >

### **`For` Loop**

`while` loops are relatively easy to follow, and a good intro, but it's usually preferable to use a `for` loop. You'll notice that its syntax is a bit more compact, as the iterator variable is inside the `for` loop. With a `while` loop, the iterator is a global variable - a variable that is outside of the scope of the loop.

#### Using a `for` loop to print the numbers from 1 - 10

```javascript
// set i equal to 1
// while i is less than or equal to 10, run the code inside the scope
// after running the code, increase i by 1 and try the loop again
for (let i = 1; i <= 10; i++) {
  console.log(i);
}
```

<br >

---

<br >

### **Activity 5 (Students)**

#### Practice with for loops: [2.3.5-Loops.md](Activities/2.3-Activities/2.3.5-Loops.md)

<br >

---

<br >

### **Summary: -**

In this module we learned ...

- Mathematical / Arithmetic Operators `( + - * / ** % )` are used to do basic math.
- Comparison are made using Relational Operators `( > < >= <= )`, or Equality Operators `( === !== == != )`.
- Logical Operators `( && || ! )` evaluate two boolean values and return a single boolean.
- Because JS is dynamically typed this could lead to Data Coercion. When JS encounters a "`+`" sign, it 'combines' strings before 'adding' numbers.
- To manage logic flow in code we use `if__else` or ternary conditionals `(condition ? ifTrue : ifFalse;)`, and `for` or `while` loops.
- In "`if`" statements, we can leverage dynamic typing and data coercion to test for Truthy / Falsy values. There are only 6 Falsy values in JS `(false, undefined, null, NaN, 0, and "")`
- In JS, curly braces `{ }` almost always establish scope.
