# Creating CRUD Operations using Express Routes

## Objective: -

In this module we'll look at ...

- Defining Mongoose Schema and Model
- Parsing the request body
- Defining a Schema and Model for the DB
- Setting up and testing a Route Handler that performs CRUD operations

<br>

## Defining a Schema and Model

Before we can save data to the database, we need to tell Mongoose what that data is going to look like.

This may seem counterintuitive, since MongoDB is supposed to be "schema-less", but this is a way for Mongoose to map
JSON Object to the database to be stored.

When we think about what we are going to be saving, we will have a Pizza that has a crust, cheese, sauce properties, all
with the type of String.

The Pizza will also have toppings property with the type of array of Strings.

Let's set up the infrastructure for the document definition and validation.

Create a `models` folder in the `server` folder, then a `Pizza.js` file in the `models` folder.

First, we need to `require` mongoose into our model file so that we can define a Schema and Model.

```javascript
const mongoose = require("mongoose");
```

To create the schema, we will declare it like so:

```javascript
const pizzaSchema = new mongoose.Schema({
  customer: {
    type: String,
    required: true
  },
  crust: {
    type: String,
    required: true
  },
  cheese: String,
  sauce: {
    type: String,
    required: true
  },
  toppings: [String]
});
```

After we have declared our schema, we will pass that schema to a Mongoose model with:

```javascript
const Pizza = mongoose.model('Pizza', pizzaSchema)
```

Creating a model from the schema adds all the functionality from Mongoose to the document template aka Schema.

Finally, we need to export both the Pizza Schema and Model so they can be used in the `index.js`.

```javascript
module.exports = {
  schema: pizzaSchema,
  model: Pizza
};
```

<br>

---

<br>

Then let's abstract the `Pizza` routes from the `index.js` in the `server` folder by creating a `routers` folder and
the `pizzas.js` router file.

Your server folder structure should look something like the following:

server |-- index.js |-- models |   `-- Pizza.js
`-- routers
`-- pizzas.js

In order to abstract the routes from the `index.js`, we need to `require` the Express router so that we can define the
CRUD route external to the Express app itself.

We also need to import the Pizza model and instantiate an instance of Express Router module.

```javascript
const {Router} = require("express");
const Pizza = require("../models/Pizza");
const router = Router();
```

Finally, we need to export the `router` variable to be used in the `index.js` file. We have not built the basic
infrastructure for Pizza routes.

```javascript
module.exports = router;
```

<br>

---

<br>

Now within the `index.js` file in the `server` folder, we now need to remove all references to the `/pizzas` routes.

Once all the `/pizzas` references have been removed with can import the new `Pizzas` router file, just under the
Mongoose require statement.

```javascript
const pizzas = require("./routers/pizzas");
```

Then we need to tell the Express app to use our new router module by adding a `app.use` statement similar to a
middleware `app.use` except we need to inform the app what route the router file should handle:

```javascript
app.use("/pizzas", pizzas);
```

Router module `app.use` statements should be after all the middleware `app.use` statements and include a string
parameter identifying the route to be handled.

In our case, the route being handling is `/pizzas`, this will prefix every route in the router module with that route.

We now will have access to `Pizza` in order to perform the operations we need to create new posts and save them to the
database.

<br>

---

<br>

## Setting up the Route Handler

The next thing we need to do is set up a new route in the `routes/pizzas.js` router module that we will use to save new
posts. We will declare an `HTTP POST Method` route at `/` and will pass in a callback function that creates a new
instance of a `Pizza` and saves it to the database.

```javascript
// Create record in MongoDB Atlas using Mongoose.js ORM
router.post("/", (request, response) => {
  const newPizza = new Pizza.model(request.body);
  newPizza.save((error, record) => {
    if (error) return response.sendStatus(500).json(error);
    return response.json(record);
  });
});
```

As you can see, once we save the `newPizza` we will just return that data back to the user as a confirmation that the
data was properly saved. If you notice, the data we are saving is coming from the `request.body` which is formatted as
JSON.

<br>

## Testing with Insomnia

In order to test this, we are going to use Insomnia to save the data.

Create a request in Insomnia and enter `Create Post` in the name field.

<br>

- In the dropdown next to the Name, select the first dropdown that says `GET` and select `POST`.

- Then, select the second dropdown that says `No Body`, select `JSON`.

- Click the Create button.

- Enter `http://localhost:4040/pizzas` in the URL field.

- In the body of the request, insert the following data:

```json
{
  "customer": "{Your Name Here}",
  "crust": "thin",
  "cheese": "mozzarella",
  "sauce": "bbq",
  "toppings": [
    "chicken",
    "onion"
  ]
}
```

<br>

When you click "Send" you should see that same data returned from the server so that you know it was properly saved.

In the event that there is an error message, you will receive that instead.

<br>

---

<br>

## Reading from the Database

Now that we have successfully saved some data to the database, we want to be able to read it back and list out
our `Pizzas`.

### Setting up Read

To set up a read operation, all we are going to do is set up a new `GET` route that queries the database for all records
and then displays it back to the user. We can do that with:

```javascript
// Get (read) all records from the collection
router.get("/", (request, response) => {
  Pizza.model.find({}, (error, record) => {
    if (error) return response.sendStatus(500).json(error);
    return response.json(record);
  });
});
```

In the above code, we are using the `pizza` constant that we created to query with the pattern `{}` which here just
means all posts, with no constraints.

If Mongoose is successful in finding some posts, it will send them all back to the user as an array of objects.

If we want to return just a single post, we can instead do the following:

```javascript
// Get a single record by ID using a query parameter
router.get("/:id", (request, response) => {
  Pizza.model.findById(request.params.id, (error, record) => {
    if (error) return response.sendStatus(500).json(error);
    return response.json(record);
  });
});
```

Where we pass the `id` of the pizza into the request parameter.

<br>

### Testing

In order to test this, open up a new request in Insomnia and enter `http://localhost:4040/pizzas/<PIZZA_ID>` leaving the
request type as `GET`.

When you click "Send" you should see a list of all the different pizzas that you have saved in your database with their
associated IDs added to the data you sent to the database.

<br>

---

<br>

## Deleting a Record

So far, we've done Create and Read. The next easiest step in the process is the ability to Delete a record.

### Setting up Delete

To set up a delete operation, we are going to create a new `DELETE` route that finds the record in the database and
deletes it. We can achieve this by doing:

```javascript
router.delete("/:id", (request, response) => {
  Pizza.model.findByIdAndRemove(request.params.id, {}, (error, record) => {
    if (error) return response.sendStatus(500).json(error);
    return response.json(record);
  });
});
```

Here, we are using the `pizza` constant that we created to query the database and find it by the `id` (which we are
passing in the request parameters `request.params`), and then once we find that record, we are deleting it.

Once the delete operation is done, we are going to simply send back whatever the deleted object was to the user.

<br>

### Testing

In order to test this, we are going to use Insomnia to delete the record. Open up a new tab in Insomnia and
enter `http://localhost:4040/pizza/<PIZZA_ID>`. In the dropdown next to the URL, select the dropdown and click on "
DELETE".

When you click "Send" you should see the deleted post being sent back. In the event that there is an error message, you
will receive that instead.

<br>

---

<br>

## Finally, Updating a Record

Now that we can successfully create and read posts in our database, we want to be able to edit them or "update". To do
this, we are simply going to add on to our previous work.

### Setting up Update

To set up an update operation, we are going to create a new `PUT` route that finds the record in the database and
updates the specified fields. We can achieve this by doing:

```javascript
router.put("/:id", (request, response) => {
  const body = request.body;
  Pizza.model.findByIdAndUpdate(
    request.params.id,
    {
      $set: {
        // Take note that the customer is not included, so it can't 
        crust: body.crust,
        cheese: body.cheese,
        sauce: body.sauce,
        toppings: body.toppings
      }
    },
    {
      new: true
    },
    (error, record) => {
      if (error) return response.sendStatus(500).json(error);
      return response.json(record);
    }
  );
});
```

Here, we are using the `pizza` constant that we created to query the database and find it by the `id` (which we are
passing in the request parameters `request.params`).

Then, once we find that record, we are setting the document parameters equal to the request body parameters.

We pass the `new` option set to `true` with our request to tell Mongoose and MongoDB to return the updated record.

You may find more detail about the options in
the [Mongoose Documentation](https://mongoosejs.com/docs/api.html#model_Model.findByIdAndUpdate)

You may notice that instead of sending back `data`, we are simply sending back `request.body`.

<br>

### Testing

In order to test this, we are going to use Insomnia to update the data.

Create a request in Insomnia and enter `Update Pizza` in the name field similar to the `Create Pizza`. You may duplicate
the `Create Pizza` request and modify it if desired.

In the dropdown next to the Name, select the first dropdown that says `GET` and select `PUT`. Then, select the second
dropdown that says `No Body`, select `JSON`. Click the Create button.

Enter `http://localhost:4040/pizzas/<PIZZA_ID>` in the URL field where `<PIZZA_ID>` is the hash in the `_id` property
from one of the records listed in the previous `GET` request. In the body of the request, insert the following data:

```json
{
  "crust": "thin",
  "cheese": "hickory smoked gouda",
  "sauce": "bbq",
  "toppings": [
    "chicken",
    "onion"
  ]
}
```

When you click "Send" you should see that same data returned from the server so that you know it was properly updated.
In the event that there is an error message, you will receive that instead.

Reminder, even if the customer property is submitted during the PUT request it will be ignored.

<br>

---

<br>

### Summary: -

In this module we looked at ...

- Defining Mongoose Schema and Model to validate and interact with MongoDB
- Parsing the request body with the build-in Express `body-parser` method
- Defining a Schema and Model to tell Mongoose what the data is going to look like
- Setting up the Route Handler to perform CRUD operations on the DB, and tested these routs using Insomnia
