# Connecting the SPA to the ReST API

### **Objective: -**

In this module we'll look at ...

- Connecting a working SPA and ReST API server
- Updating the server to handle Cross-Origin Resource Sharing (CORS)
- Steps to add a View to the SPA that consumes the API

<br>

---

<br>

### Bringing it all together ...

At this point we have a working SPA and ReST API server running disconnected. It is time to connect them up so that the SPA can use the data stored in the MongoDB database.

<br>

---

<br>

## Updating the server to handle Cross-Origin Resource Sharing (CORS)

**Cross-Origin Resource Sharing (CORS)** is an HTTP-header based mechanism that allows a server to indicate any other origins (domain, scheme, or port) than its own, from which a browser should permit loading of resources.

For security reasons, modern browsers restrict cross-origin HTTP requests initiated from scripts.

> Read more about CORS at: https://developer.mozilla.org/en-US/docs/Web/HTTP/CORS

<br>

Let's add a CORS middleware to the `server/index.js` that adds the necessary headers and, in our case, _allows any origin to access our server_.

> Note: This isn't advised for a production application and violates every security measure, so don't do this in a real enterprise application.

<br>

Right below where the logging middleware is defined add the CORS middleware

```node
// CORS Middleware
const cors = (req, res, next) => {
  res.setHeader(
    "Access-Control-Allow-Headers",
    "X-Requested-With,content-type, Accept,Authorization,Origin"
  );
  res.setHeader("Access-Control-Allow-Origin", "*");
  res.setHeader(
    "Access-Control-Allow-Methods",
    "GET, POST, OPTIONS, PUT, PATCH, DELETE"
  );
  res.setHeader("Access-Control-Allow-Credentials", true);
  next();
};
```

Now we need to use the CORS middleware for it to be functional. Let's add the use statement next the the `app.use(logging);` statement.

```node
app.use(cors);
```

<br>

---

<br>

### **Summary: -**

In this module we look at ...

- Bring the frontend and backend together by connecting the SPA and the ReST API server
- Updating the server to handle Cross-Origin Resource Sharing (CORS)
- Steps to add a Pizza! view to the SPA that consumes the API, and displays the results on the frontend
