# The Document Store Database

## Objective: -

In this module we'll look at ...
- SQL & Relational Database Management Systems
- NoSQL & Document Databases
- The MongoDB document store NoSQL Databases, and how to set it up
- Connecting MongoDB to our Express server


<br>


### **Databases**

A dynamic site requires a database to work properly. All information is stored in the database, like user profiles or images they've uploaded, or blog posts. Web developers work with programming languages like Java or .Net Framework, since they need to work with something the database understands. The code they write communicates with the server and then tells the browser what to use from the database.

<br>

---

<br>

## SQL & Relational Database Management Systems

<br>

**SQL** (**S**tructured **Q**uery **L**anguage) is a standard language for accessing and manipulating _relational_ databases. Although SQL is a standard, there are different versions of the SQL language. However, to be compliant with the standard, they all support at least the major commands (such as `SELECT`, `UPDATE`, `DELETE`, `INSERT`, `WHERE`) in a similar manner. Most of the SQL database programs also have their own proprietary extensions in addition to the SQL standard.

The data in **R**elational **D**atabase **M**anagement **S**ystem (**RDBMS**) is stored in database objects called _tables_. A table is a collection of related data entries and it consists of _columns_ and _rows_. A _record_, also called a row, is each individual entry that exists in a table. A record is a horizontal entity in a table. A _column_ is a vertical entity in a table that contains all information associated with a specific field in a table.

Relational databases require that schemas be defined before you can add data. For example, you might want to store data about your customers such as phone numbers, first and last name, address, city and state – a SQL database needs to know what you are storing in advance.

<br>

---

<br>

## NoSQL & Document Databases

<br>

A **NoSQL** (originally referring to "**no**n **SQL**" or "_non relational_") database provides a mechanism for storage and retrieval of data that is modeled in means _other_ than the tabular relations used in relational databases. NoSQL systems are also sometimes called "**N**ot **o**nly **SQL**" to emphasize that they may support SQL-like query languages or sit alongside SQL databases.

In a _**relational database**_, a book record is often dissembled (or “normalized”) and stored in _separate tables_, and relationships are defined by _primary_ and _foreign keys_. For example, a Books table could have columns for ISBN, Book Title, and Edition Number, while the Authors table has columns for AuthorID and Author Name, and finally the Author-ISBN table has columns for AuthorID and ISBN. The relational model is designed to enable the database to enforce referential integrity between tables in the database, normalized to reduce the redundancy, and generally optimized for storage.

In a _**NoSQL database**_, a book record is usually stored as a JSON document. For each book, the item, ISBN, Book Title, Edition Number, Author Name, and AuthorID are stored as attributes in a single document. In this model, data is optimized for intuitive development and horizontal scalability.

<br>

### NoSQL Database Types

- _**Document** databases_ pair each key with a JSON-like complex data structure known as a document. Documents can contain many different key-value pairs, or key-array pairs, or even nested documents.
- _**Graph** stores_ are used to store information about _networks_ of data, such as social connections. Graph stores include Neo4J and Giraph.
- _**Key-value stores**_ are the simplest NoSQL databases. Every single item in the database is stored as an attribute name (or 'key'), together with its value. Examples of key-value stores are Riak and Berkeley DB. Some key-value stores, such as Redis, allow each value to have a type, such as 'integer', which adds functionality.
- _**Wide-column stores**_ such as Cassandra and HBase are optimized for queries over large datasets, and store columns of data together, instead of rows

<br>

---

### Data Structure

Relational databases are table-based. NoSQL databases can be document based, graph databases, key-value pairs, or wide-column stores. Relational databases were built during a time that data was mostly structured and clearly defined by their relationships. Today, we know that data today is much more complex. NoSQL databases are designed to handle the more complex, unstructured data, (such as texts, social media posts, photos, videos, email) which increasingly make up much of the data that exists today.

Reference: [NoSQL vs Relational Databases](https://www.mongodb.com/scale/nosql-vs-relational-databases)

<br>

### **CRUD**

Databases provide four basic types of functionality. The database must be able to **C**reate, **R**ead, **U**pdate, and **D**elete resources (**CRUD**).

- **Create** - new entry in collection/table
- **Read** - retrieve the resource and display the results
- **Update** - changes information in an entry
- **Delete** - remove the entry

<br>

---

### Additional Resources

[Relational vs. NoSQL data](https://docs.microsoft.com/en-us/dotnet/architecture/cloud-native/relational-vs-nosql-data)

<br>

---

<br>

## Document Store NoSQL Databases

Document databases are a type of NoSQL database that stores all information for a given object in a single instance in the database, and every stored object can be different from every other.

Document databases store all information for a given object in a single instance in the database, and every stored object can be different from every other.
This eliminates the need for object-relational mapping while loading data into the database.

Where as the more "traditional" Relational database such as MySQL or PostgreSQL generally store data in separate tables that are defined by the programmer, and a single object may be spread across several tables using keys to define the relationships between the table data.

A database, regardless of type, allows you to persist data from your web application -- to be stored and read between users and sessions.

<br>

---

<br>

## MongoDB

MongoDB is one of the most popular Document Store databases in the industry. Typically coming in just behind the top relational databases such Oracle, MySQL and Microsoft SQL Server.

### Setting up MongoDB Atlas

<br>

1. Sign in to MongoDB Atlas (https://www.mongodb.com/cloud), you should have created an account during orientation.
2. Create a new project using the "New Project" button or the modal presented when your account is empty.
    1. No need to add any members or set permissions if asked
3. Click the "Databases" menu on the left side menu
    1. Create a database by clicking the "Build a Database" button
    2. Select the "Shared" (FREE) plan by clicking the "Create" button
    3. Select the "AWS" option for "Cloud Provider & Region"
    4. Select "N. Virginia" under North America for the region selection
    5. The "Cluster Tier" default of "M0 Sandbox" is acceptable
    6. The default values can be used for "Additional Settings"
    7. Give your cluster a name under "Cluster Name", you may leave it as the default "Cluster0" as desired
    8. Click the "Create Cluster" button to start the build out of your database, this will take a few minutes
4. **Please Ignore the "Security Quickstart"**
5. Click the "Database Access" menu on the left side menu
6. Add yourself as a user by clicking the "Add New Database User" button
    1. "Authentication Method" should remain "Password"
    2. Create a new username and password to access the database. **Do not use any special characters, letters and numbers only!**
        1. This is not the MongoDB Atlas administrative account you already have.
    3. The default values can be used for all other settings.
7. Click the "Network Access" menu on the left side menu
8. Add an IP address by clicking the "Add IP Address" button, this allows your Netlify and local computer to access the database when it is running your Express app.
    1. Click the "ALLOW ACCESS FROM ANYWHERE" button, which will populate the "Access List Entry" field with "0.0.0.0/0"
        1. The "0.0.0.0/0" subnet is NOT secure and allows the entire Internet access to the database
    2. Click the "Confirm" button to accept the form
9. Click the "Database" link under the "Deployment" section on the left menu.
    1. Click the "Connect" button in the "Cluster0" section
    2. Click the "Connect your application" button
    3. Copy the connection string (Make sure the "Include full driver code example" is unchecked)
10. Add the connection string to the the `.env` file
    1. Add the following key value pair:
        1. `MONGODB={connection string}`
    2. Replace `<password>` from the connection string with your MongoDB database user password.

<br>

---

<br>

## Connecting MongoDB to Express

For this course, we will be using a library called "Mongoose" to handle all of our connections to MongoDB. Mongoose is a library that handles connections and data mapping with MongoDB.

To install Mongoose, you can run `npm install mongoose`, but if you are running your files within this project directory, we installed it for you already. To include Mongoose in your project, add the line:

```javascript
const mongoose = require('mongoose')
```

Once you've required Mongoose, it's time to hook it up to MongoDB. You can do this by initializing the connection string using:

```javascript
mongoose.connect(process.env.MONGODB)
```

We will need to add the connection string for the database to `.env` under the MONGODB key.

In this example, we are simply going to call our database `pizzeria`, but note that you can call this whatever you want.

The next thing we are going to do is map the constant `db` to `mongoose.connection` so that we can refer to it later on in our code without having to type it all out again. You can do this by using:

```javascript
const db = mongoose.connection
```

The next lines are going to be what handles events that Mongoose sends back to indicate the status of our connection to the database.

The first line is listening for "error" events which will tell us if there were any connection issues.

The next line is going to tell us that the connection to the database was successful.

```javascript
db.on("error", console.error.bind(console, "Connection Error:"));
db.once(
  "open",
  console.log.bind(console, "Successfully opened connection to Mongo!")
);
```

<br>

---

<br>

## Test Our Server

To start your own server script, from the root of the project and run `npm run app:watch`.

<br>

---

<br>

### Summary: -

In this module we looked at ...

- The MongoDB document store NoSQL Databases, and how to set it up
- Connecting MongoDB to our Express server
- Parsing the request body with the build-in Express `body-parser` method
- Defining a Schema and Model to tell Mongoose what the data is going to look like
- Setting up the Route Handler to perform CRUD operations on the DB, and tested these routs using Insomnia
